\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c  This document is part of the GNU ease.js manual.
@c  Copyright (C) 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c    Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
@c    under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
@c    any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
@c    Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
@c    A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
@c    Documentation License''.

@c %**start of header
@setfilename easejs.info
@settitle GNU ease.js Manual v@value{VERSION}
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi

@copying
This manual is for GNU ease.js, version @value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".
@end quotation

@end copying


@titlepage
@title GNU ease.js Manual v@value{VERSION}
@subtitle User & Developer Documentation
@author Mike Gerwitz

@c  Start copyright page
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Main
@end ifnottex

@menu
* About::                  About the project
* Integration::            How to integrate ease.js into your project
* Classes::                Learn to work with Classes
* Member Keywords::        Control member visibility and more.
* Interoperability::       Playing nice with vanilla ECMAScript.
* Source Tree::            Overview of source tree
* Implementation Details:: The how and why of ease.js
* License::                Document License
@end menu

@ifnottex

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@include about.texi
@include integration.texi
@include classes.texi
@include mkeywords.texi
@include interop.texi
@include source-tree.texi
@include impl-details.texi
@include license.texi

@bye
